.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Guo Xuenan <guoxuenan@huawei.com>
.\"
.TH DUMP.EROFS 1
.SH NAME
dump.erofs \- retrieve directory and file entries, show specific file
or overall disk statistics information from an EROFS-formatted image.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdump.erofs\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIIMAGE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dump.erofs
is used to retrieve erofs metadata from \fIIMAGE\fP and demonstrate
1) overall disk statistics,
2) superblock information,
3) file information of the given inode NID,
4) file extent information of the given inode NID.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-\-device=" path
Specify an extra device to be used together.
You may give multiple `--device' options in the correct order.
.TP
.BI "\-\-nid=" NID
Specify an inode NID in order to print its file information.
.TP
.BI "\-\-path=" path
Specify an inode path in order to print its file information.
.TP
.BI \-e
Show the file extent information. The option depends on option --nid to specify NID.
.TP
.BI \-V
Print the version number and exit.
.TP
.BI \-s
Show superblock information of the an EROFS-formatted image.
.TP
.BI \-S
Show EROFS disk statistics, including file type/size distribution, number of (un)compressed files, compression ratio of the whole image, etc.
.SH AUTHOR
Initial code was written by Wang Qi <mpiglet@outlook.com>, Guo Xuenan <guoxuenan@huawei.com>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Guo Xuenan <guoxuenan@huawei.com>
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B dump.erofs
is part of erofs-utils package and is available from git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/xiang/erofs-utils.git.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkfs.erofs(1),
.BR fsck.erofs(1)
