.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Daeho Jeong <daehojeong@google.com>
.\"
.TH FSCK.EROFS 1
.SH NAME
fsck.erofs \- tool to check an EROFS filesystem's integrity
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBfsck.erofs\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIIMAGE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
fsck.erofs is used to scan an EROFS filesystem \fIIMAGE\fR and check the
integrity of it.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version number of fsck.erofs and exit.
.TP
.BI "\-d " #
Specify the level of debugging messages. The default is 2, which shows basic
warning messages.
.TP
.B \-p
Print total compression ratio of all files including compressed and
non-compressed files.
.TP
.BI "\-\-device=" path
Specify an extra blob device to be used together.
You may give multiple
.B --device
options in the correct order.
.TP
.BI "\-\-extract" "[=directory]"
Test to extract the whole file system. It scans all inode data, including
compressed inode data, which leads to more I/O and CPU load, so it might
take a long time depending on the image size.

Optionally extract contents of the \fIIMAGE\fR to \fIdirectory\fR.
.TP
.BI "--[no-]xattrs"
Whether to dump extended attributes during extraction (default off).
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Display help string and exit.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-A\fR, \fB-y\fR
These options do nothing at all; they are provided only for compatibility with
the fsck programs of other filesystems.
.SH AUTHOR
This version of \fBfsck.erofs\fR is written by
Daeho Jeong <daehojeong@google.com>.
.SH AVAILABILITY
\fBfsck.erofs\fR is part of erofs-utils package and is available from
git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/xiang/erofs-utils.git.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fsck (8).
