.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Gao Xiang <xiang@kernel.org>
.\"
.TH MKFS.EROFS 1
.SH NAME
mkfs.erofs \- tool to create an EROFS filesystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmkfs.erofs\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIDESTINATION\fR \fISOURCE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
EROFS is a new enhanced lightweight linux read-only filesystem with modern
designs (eg. no buffer head, reduced metadata, inline xattrs/data, etc.) for
scenarios which need high-performance read-only requirements, e.g. Android OS
for smartphones and LIVECDs.
.PP
It also provides fixed-sized output compression support, which improves storage
density, keeps relatively higher compression ratios, which is more useful to
achieve high performance for embedded devices with limited memory since it has
unnoticable memory overhead and page cache thrashing.
.PP
mkfs.erofs is used to create such EROFS filesystem \fIDESTINATION\fR image file
from various \fISOURCE\fR, where \fISOURCE\fR can be:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
a local directory
.IP \(bu 2
a (compressed) tarball
.IP \(bu 2
an S3 bucket or a prefix within it
.IP \(bu 2
an OCI image reference
.IP \(bu 2
other EROFS image(s), see \fIREBUILD MODE\fR below
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-b " block-size
Set the fundamental block size of the filesystem in bytes.  In other words,
specify the smallest amount of data that can be accessed at a time.  The
default is the system page size.  It cannot be less than 512 bytes.
.TP
.BI "\-C " max-pcluster-size
Specify the maximum size of compress physical cluster in bytes.
This may cause the big pcluster feature to be enabled (Linux 5.13+).
.TP
.BI "\-m " "#\fR[:\fIcompression-algorithm\fR]"
Enable metadata compression with #-byte clusters in a metabox inode (Linux
6.17+); optionally specify a compression algorithm (defaults to data
compression algorithm if omitted).
.TP
.BI "\-\-MZ\fR[\fP=<0|[id]>\fR]\fP"
Put inode metadata ('i') and/or directory data ('d') into the separate metadata
zone.  This improves spatial locality of metadata layout within the image, which
is beneficial for metadata access if the storage has long I/O latencies.
.TP
.BI "\-x " #
Limit how many xattrs will be inlined. The default is 2.
.TP
.BI "\-z " compression-algorithm \fR[\fP, # \fR][\fP: ... \fR]\fP
Set a primary algorithm for data compression, which can be set with an
optional compression level. Alternative algorithms could be specified
and separated by colons.  See the output of
.B mkfs.erofs \-\-help
for a listing of the algorithms that \fBmkfs.erofs\fR is compiled with
and what their respective level ranges are.
.TP
.BI "\-\-zD\fR[\fP=<0|1>\fR]\fP"
Used to enable directory compression: 0=disable, 1=enable. If the optional
argument is omitted, directory compression is enabled by default.
.TP
.BI "\-d " #
Specify the level of debugging messages. The default is 2, which shows basic
warning messages.
Disables storing xattrs if < 0.
.TP
.BI "\-E " [^]extended-option \fR[\fP, ... \fR]\fP
Set extended options for the filesystem. Extended options are comma separated,
and may take an extra argument using the equals ('=') sign.  To disable a
feature, usually prefix the extended option name with a caret ('^') character.
The following extended options are supported:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.BI 48bit
Enable 48-bit block addressing and encoded extents to support larger filesystem
images and byte-oriented data compression mainly for Zstandard. (Linux 6.15+)
.TP
.BI all-fragments
Forcely record the whole files into a special inode for better compression and
it may take an argument as the pcluster size of the packed inode in bytes.
(Linux 6.1+)
.TP
.BI dedupe
Enable global compressed data deduplication to minimize duplicated data in
the filesystem. May further reduce image size when used with
.BR -E\ fragments .
(Linux 6.1+)
.TP
.BI dot-omitted
Omit the "." (dot) directory entry in all directories to reduce metadata
overhead (Linux 6.15+). It will also enable \fB48bit\fR on-disk layout.
.TP
.BI force-inode-compact
Force generation of compact (32-byte) inodes.
.TP
.BI force-inode-extended
Force generation of extended (64-byte) inodes.
.TP
.BI force-inode-blockmap
Force generation of inode chunk format as a 4-byte block address array.
.TP
.BI force-chunk-indexes
Forcely generate inode chunk format as an 8-byte chunk index (with device ID).
.TP
.BI [^]fragdedupe\fR[\fP= <inode|full> \fR]\fP
Set the mode for fragment data deduplication.  It's effective only when
\fI-E(all)-fragments\fP is used together.  If a caret ('^') character is set,
fragment data deduplication is disabled.
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.I inode
Deduplicate fragment data only when the inode data is identical.  This option
will result in faster image generation with the current codebase
.TP
.I full
Always deduplicate fragment data if possible
.RE
.TP
.BI fragments\fR[\fP= size \fR]\fP
Pack the tail part (pcluster) of compressed files, or entire files, into a
special inode for smaller image sizes, and it may take an argument as the
pcluster size of the packed inode in bytes. (Linux 6.1+)
.TP
.BI ^inline_data
Don't inline regular files.  It's typically useful to enable FSDAX (Linux 5.15+)
for those images, however, there could be other use cases too.
.TP
.B legacy-compress " (obsolete; should not be used in daily use)"
Disable "compacted indexes" on-disk layout.
.TP
.BI nosbcrc
Disable filesystem superblock checksum explicitly.
.TP
.BI plain-xattr-prefixes
Store long extended attribute name prefixes directly on disk rather than in
special inodes. By default, long xattr name prefixes are placed in metabox_inode
(if metabox is enabled) or packed_inode (if fragments is enabled). This option
forces them to be stored as plain on-disk structures.
.TP
.B xattr-name-filter
Enable a name filter for extended attributes to optimize negative lookups.
(Linux 6.6+).
.TP
.BI ztailpacking
Pack the tail part (pcluster) of compressed files into its metadata to save
more space and the tail part I/O. (Linux 5.17+)
.RE
.TP
.BI "\-L " volume-label
Set the volume label for the filesystem to
.IR volume-label .
The maximum length of the volume label is 15 bytes.
.TP
.BI "\-T " #
Specify a UNIX timestamp for image creation time for reproducible builds.
If \fI--mkfs-time\fR is not specified, it will behave as \fI--all-time\fR:
setting all files to the specified UNIX timestamp instead of using the
modification times of the source files.
.TP
.BI "\-U " UUID
Set the universally unique identifier (UUID) of the filesystem to
.IR UUID .
The format of the UUID is a series of hex digits separated by hyphens,
like this: "c1b9d5a2-f162-11cf-9ece-0020afc76f16".
The
.I UUID
parameter may also be one of the following:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.I clear
clear the file system UUID
.TP
.I random
generate a new randomly-generated UUID
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-all-root
Make all files owned by root.
.TP
.B \-\-all-time
(used together with \fB-T\fR) set all files to the fixed timestamp. This is the
default.
.TP
.BI "\-\-async-queue-limit=" #
Specify the maximum number of entries in the multi-threaded job queue.
.TP
.BI "\-\-aufs"
Replace aufs special files with overlayfs metadata.
.TP
.BI "\-\-blobdev " file
Specify an extra blob device to store chunk-based data.
.TP
.BI "\-\-chunksize " #
Generate chunk-based files with #-byte chunks.
.TP
.BI "\-\-clean=" MODE
Run full clean build with the given \fIMODE\fR, which could be one of
\fBdata\fR, \fBrvsp\fR, or \fB0\fR.

If \fB\-\-clean\fR is specified without an explicit value, it is treated
as \fB\-\-clean=data\fR.

\fBdata\fR: Import complete file data from the source into the destination
image, creating a fully self-contained EROFS image. This mode is useful when
you need a standalone image that doesn't depend on external blob devices.

\fBrvsp\fR: Reserve space for file data in the destination image without
copying the actual content. The file data will need to be filled in later
through other means. This is useful for creating sparse images or when the
actual data will be populated separately.

\fB0\fR:Fill all inode data with zeros.

The current source-specific support for \fIMODE\fR:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.I Local directory source
Only \fBdata\fR is supported. \fBrvsp\fR and \fB0\fR will be ignored.
.TP
.I Tar source (\fB\-\-tar\fR)
\fBdata\fR and \fBrvsp\fR are supported. \fB0\fR will be ignored.
Note that \fBrvsp\fR takes precedence over \fB--tar=i\fR or \fB--tar=headerball\fR.
.TP
.I Rebuild mode
Only \fBrvsp\fR is supported.
.TP
.I S3 source (\fB\-\-s3\fR)
\fBdata\fR and \fB0\fR are supported.
.TP
.I OCI source (\fB\-\-oci\fR)
Only \fBdata\fR is supported.
.RE
.TP
.BI "\-\-compress-hints=" file
Apply a per-file compression strategy. Each line in
.I file
is defined by
tokens separated by spaces in the following form.  Optionally, instead of
the given primary algorithm, alternative algorithms can be specified with
\fIalgorithm-index\fR explicitly:
.RS 1.2i
<pcluster-size-in-bytes> [algorithm-index] <match-pattern>
.RE
.IP
.IR match-pattern s
are extended regular expressions, matched against absolute paths within
the output filesystem, with no leading /.
.TP
.BI "\-\-dsunit=" #
Align all data block addresses to multiples of #.

If \fI--dsunit\fR and \fI--chunksize\fR are both set, \fI--dsunit\fR will be
ignored if it is larger than \fI--chunksize\fR.

If \fI--dsunit\fR is larger, it spans multiple chunks, for example:
\fI-b 4096\fR, \fI--dsunit 512\fR (2MiB), \fI--chunksize 4096\fR

Once a chunk is deduplicated, all subsequent chunks will no longer be
aligned. For optimal performance, it is recommended to set \fI--dsunit\fR to
the same value as \fI--chunksize\fR:

E.g. \fI-b\fR 4096, \fI--dsunit 512\fR (2MiB), \fI--chunksize $((4096*512))\fR

.TP
.BI "\-\-exclude-path=" path
Ignore file that matches the exact literal path.
You may give multiple
.B --exclude-path
options.
.TP
.BI "\-\-exclude-regex=" regex
Ignore files that match the given extended regular expression.
You may give multiple
.B --exclude-regex
options.
.TP
.BI "\-\-file-contexts=" file
Read SELinux label configuration/overrides from \fIfile\fR in the
.BR selinux_file (5)
format.
.TP
.BI "\-\-force-uid=" UID
Set all file UIDs to \fIUID\fR.
.TP
.BI "\-\-force-gid=" GID
Set all file GIDs to \fIGID\fR.
.TP
.BI "\-\-fsalignblks=" #
Specify the alignment of the primary device size (usually the filesystem size)
in blocks.
.TP
.BI "\-\-gid-offset=" GIDOFFSET
Add \fIGIDOFFSET\fR to all file GIDs.
When this option is used together with
.BR --force-gid ,
the final file gids are
set to \fIGID\fR + \fIGID-OFFSET\fR.
.TP
.BI "\-\-gzinfo\fR[\fP=" file \fR]\fP
(used together with \fI--tar\fR) Generate AWS SOCI-compatible zinfo to support
random gzip access. Source file must be a gzip-compressed tarball.
.TP
.BI "\-\-hard-dereference"
Dereference hardlinks and add links as separate inodes.
.TP
.B "\-\-ignore-mtime"
Ignore the file modification time whenever it would cause \fBmkfs.erofs\fR to
use extended inodes over compact inodes. When not using a fixed timestamp, this
can reduce total metadata size. Implied by
.BR "-E force-inode-compact" .
.TP
.BI "\-\-incremental=" MODE
Run an incremental build where DESTINATION is an existing EROFS image,
and the data specified by SOURCE will be incrementally appended to the image.
\fIMODE\fR has the same meaning as in \fB\-\-clean\fR above.
Incremental build is unsupported for \fB\-\-s3\fR and \fB\-\-oci\fR sources.

If \fB\-\-incremental\fR is specified without an explicit value, it is treated
as \fB\-\-incremental=data\fR.

The current source-specific support for \fIMODE\fR:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.I Local directory source
Only \fBdata\fR is supported. \fBrvsp\fR and \fB0\fR will be ignored.
.TP
.I Tar source (\fB\-\-tar\fR)
\fBdata\fR and \fBrvsp\fR are supported. \fB0\fR will be ignored.
Note that \fBrvsp\fR takes precedence over \fB--tar=i\fR or \fB--tar=headerball\fR.
.TP
.I Rebuild mode
Only \fBrvsp\fR is supported.
.RE
.TP
.BI "\-\-max-extent-bytes=" #
Specify maximum decompressed extent size in bytes. The default is unlimited.
.TP
.B \-\-mkfs-time
(used together with \fB-T\fR) the given timestamp is only applied to the build
time.
.TP
.BI "\-\-mount-point=" path
Specify the prefix of target filesystem path (default: /).
.TP
.BI "\-\-oci\fR[\fP=<f|i>\fR]\fP"
Generate a full (f) or index-only (i) image from OCI remote source.
Additional options can be specified:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.BI platform= platform
Specify the platform (default: linux/amd64).
.TP
.BI layer= #
Specify the layer index to extract (0-based; omit to extract all layers).
.TP
.BI blob= digest
Specify the blob digest to extract (omit to extract all layers).
.TP
.BI username= username
Username for authentication (optional).
.TP
.BI password= password
Password for authentication (optional).
.TP
.B insecure
Use HTTP instead of HTTPS (optional).
.RE
.TP
.BI "\-\-offset=" #
Skip # bytes at the beginning of the image.
.TP
.BI "\-\-ovlfs-strip\fR[\fP=<0|1>\fR]\fP"
Strip overlayfs metadata in the target image (e.g. whiteouts).
.TP
.B "\-\-preserve-mtime"
Use extended inodes instead of compact inodes if the file modification time
would overflow compact inodes. This is the default. Overrides
.BR --ignore-mtime .
.TP
.B "\-\-quiet"
Quiet execution (do not write anything to standard output.)
.TP
.BI "\-\-root-xattr-isize=" #
Ensure the inline xattr size of the root directory is # bytes at least.
.TP
.BI "\-\-s3=" endpoint
Generate an image from S3-compatible object store.
Additional options can be specified:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.BI passwd_file= file
S3FS-compatible password file, with the format of "accessKey:secretKey" in
the first line.
.TP
.BI urlstyle= style
S3 API calling style (vhost or path) (default: vhost).
.TP
.BI sig= version
S3 API signature version (2 or 4) (default: 2).
.TP
.BI region= code
Region code in which endpoint belongs to (required for sig=4).
.RE
.TP
.BI "\-\-sort=" MODE
Inode data sorting order for tarballs as input.

\fIMODE\fR may be one of \fBnone\fR or \fBpath\fR.

\fBnone\fR: No particular data order is specified for the target image to
avoid unnecessary overhead; Currently, it takes effect if `-E^inline_data` is
specified and no compression is applied.

\fBpath\fR: Data order strictly follows the tree generation order. (default)
.TP
.BI "\-\-tar, \-\-tar=" MODE
Treat \fISOURCE\fR as a tarball or tarball-like "headerball" rather than as a
directory.

\fIMODE\fR may be one of \fBf\fR, \fBi\fR, or \fBheaderball\fR.

\fBf\fR: Generate a full EROFS image from a regular tarball. (default)

\fBi\fR: Generate a meta-only EROFS image from a regular tarball. Only
metadata such as dentries, inodes, and xattrs will be added to the image,
without file data. Uses for such images include as a layer in an overlay
filesystem with other data-only layers.

\fBheaderball\fR: Generate a meta-only EROFS image from a stream identical
to a tarball except that file data is not present after each file header.
.TP
.BI "\-\-uid-offset=" UIDOFFSET
Add \fIUIDOFFSET\fR to all file UIDs.
When this option is used together with
.BR --force-uid ,
the final file uids are
set to \fIUID\fR + \fIUIDOFFSET\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-ungzip\fR[\fP= file \fR]\fP
Filter tarball streams through gzip. Optionally, raw streams can be dumped
together.
.TP
.BI \-\-unxz\fR[\fP= file \fR]\fP
Filter tarball streams through xz, lzma, or lzip. Optionally, raw streams can
be dumped together.
.TP
.BI "\-\-vmdk-desc=" FILE
Generate a VMDK descriptor file to merge sub-filesystems, which can be used
for tar index or rebuild mode.
.TP
.BI "\-\-workers=" #
Set the number of worker threads to # (default: number of CPUs).
.TP
.BI "\-\-xattr-inode-digest=" name
Specify extended attribute name to record inode digests.
.TP
.BI "\-\-xattr-prefix=" PREFIX
Specify a customized extended attribute namespace prefix for space saving,
e.g. "trusted.overlay.".  You may give multiple
.B --xattr-prefix
options (Linux 6.4+).
.TP
.BI "\-\-zfeature-bits=" #
Toggle filesystem compression features according to given bits #.
Each bit in the value corresponds to a specific compression feature:
.RS 1.2i
.nf
.ft CW
  7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0  (bit position)
  | | | | | | | |
  | | | | | | | +-- Bit 0 (1)   : legacy-compress
  | | | | | | +---- Bit 1 (2)   : ztailpacking
  | | | | | +------ Bit 2 (4)   : fragments
  | | | | +-------- Bit 3 (8)   : all-fragments
  | | | +---------- Bit 4 (16)  : dedupe
  | | +------------ Bit 5 (32)  : fragdedupe
  | +-------------- Bit 6 (64)  : 48bit
  +---------------- Bit 7 (128) : dot-omitted
.ft
.fi
.RE
.IP
For example,
.B --zfeature-bits=6
(binary: 0000 0110) enables ztailpacking (bit 1) and fragments (bit 2).
.RE
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Display help string and exit.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version number and exit.
.SH NOTES
.TP
.B REBUILD MODE
\fBRebuild mode\fR allows \fBmkfs.erofs\fR to generate a new EROFS image from
one or more existing EROFS images passed as \fISOURCE\fR(s).
This mode is particularly useful for merging multiple EROFS images or creating
index-only metadata images that reference data in the source images.

When SOURCE contains one or more EROFS image files,
.B mkfs.erofs
automatically enters rebuild mode. The behavior is controlled by the
.B \-\-clean
or
.B \-\-incremental
options, which determine how file data is handled:
.RS 1.2i
.TP
.I Default mode (blob index)
The generated image contains only metadata (inodes, dentries, and xattrs).
File data is referenced through chunk-based indexes pointing to the original
source images, which act as external blob devices. This creates a compact
metadata layer suitable for layered filesystem scenarios, similar to container
image layers.
.TP
.I rvsp mode
\fB\-\-clean=rvsp\fR or \fB\-\-incremental=rvsp\fR: Reserve space for file
data without copying actual content, useful for creating sparse images.
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
This version of \fBmkfs.erofs\fR is written by Li Guifu <blucerlee@gmail.com>,
Miao Xie <miaoxie@huawei.com> and Gao Xiang <xiang@kernel.org> with
continuously improvements from others.
.PP
This manual page was written by Gao Xiang <xiang@kernel.org>.
.SH AVAILABILITY
\fBmkfs.erofs\fR is part of erofs-utils package and is available from
git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/xiang/erofs-utils.git.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkfs (8).
